BASED ON A TRUE STORY
Birger Eriksen.
Right ...
We just saw photos from
the sinking of the German cruiser Blücher.
One of the most talked about
events of the war in Norway.
It was sunk by Oscarsborg Fortress
under the command of Colonel Eriksen.
who has joined us today.
May I ask why I've been
summoned by this Commission?
Our task is to investigate
military matters from 1940.
I've written
a number of reports on the issue.
Which we have read.
But we need more information
for the official report.
We register that there are
conflicting reports from this event.
-You don't believe my reports?
-We don't believe anything. Eriksen.
Maybe you can start by describing
the situation at Oscarsborg and the events
that took place there April six years ago?
As reported by the BBC
in a statement broadcast at 8 a.m..
British and French warships deployed
mines in Norwegian waters last night.
The Foreign Secretary expounded
on the French-British minelaying activity.
SERIOUS VIOLATIONS OF
NORWEGIAN NEUTRALITY
Commander's office. Oscarsborg.
Yes. one moment.
Father.
It's Horten naval command. Smith-Johannsen.
-This is Eriksen.
-Good day. Colonel.
This is Admiral Smith-Johannsen.
We have multiple reports of
German and British ships in our waters.
I have decided to keep the alert level at
"heightened vigilance" until further notice.
Nothing further to report.
Are we going to lay mines?
No. not for you. not that far up the fjord.
We might do it further out in the Oslofjord.
But there's no need to take any measures
at the reserve fortresses.
I see ...
Roger that. Thank you.
Any news?
We maintain current alert levels.
Can you sign this while I've got you here?
Father?
You need to sign this. so I can return it.
And this arrived.
Another rejection?
They'll never agree to any upgrades.
We'll just keep applying.
How many years will
that take. do you think?
You will be retired by then. anyway.
A thing long overdue.
Are you calling your father old?
Yes.
I do.
And out of shape.
I just look forward to
when you're done with all this.
-Any news?
-No. Alert level maintained.
-Did you fix the issue?
-Yes. It was the lock on cannon 3.
You were right. Almost rusted through.
We've spent all day
getting it to move smoothly.
Good. Keep slathering it on. Bonsak.
I told Sødem here that we need
a shit ton of lubricating oil.
But I very much doubt this
Labour government will spare the funds.
-Is the Drøbak searchlight operational?
-So I've been told.
So you've "been told"?
In the week I've been here.
I haven't got around to everything yet.
But I'll go in person tonight to verify.
DRØBAK. MAINLAND
What are your plans going forward?
Once you retire. I mean.
Are you moving up north?
-I didn't mean to intrude.
-We're moving down south.
Oh yes?
-Here. to Drøbak.
-You don't say?
-We've found a house in Seimbakken.
-I see.
Drøbak is a fine place to live.
We've got a great bakery.
I doubt you will run into me at the bakery.
Lucie has made food.
There's enough for one more.
Thank you. but I need to get going.
KOPÅS，MAINLAND
How many men do you have?
Two of the boys were sent home with a cold.
So presently. we're twenty-seven.
Weren't we supposed to get
a reply today to our request
to build a shelter here?
Yes.
The answer is the same.
Request denied.
Well. if anything happens.
at least we've got our windbreakers.
I'm bitterly aware of this. Engen.
but I've tried everything.
Request after request.
All denied.
Both here and at the main battery.
Is the Commander
worried about the headlines?
Do you think something could happen?
COMMANDER'S RESIDENCE. OSCARSBORG
Here you go.
Good boy. Peik.
Mother called. She's staying
at the farm a few more days.
I see.
I'm done with this room.
but I was wondering about these.
Do you want these? Military textbooks?
You won't need those ...
We don't need to do this now.
The move still a long way away.
Not at your speed.
Hello!
Hello.
Did you give him sausages again?
No.
Savoury food upsets his stomach
You know that.
Borghild?
-Borghild?
-What?
Come here.
Do your remember this?
You were determined.
Stubborn.
I wonder who I got that from.
I remember being thrilled here.
We were playing cards. right?
I remember. I won every time.
I didn't realise you let me win.
And I was so proud. because ...
Mother said she'd call.
-Eriksen.
- This is Unneberg.
We have new intelligence.
There is a large German naval force
heading north from Denmark.
When did you receive this?
HQ received it a few hours ago.
-Hours ago?
-Yes. But we were just informed now.
-Did they say anything else?
-They're concerned.
They fear a clash between German
and British ships in Norwegian waters.
If this escalates. we'll have to
use force to assert our sovereignty.
Right.
Unneberg. call an officer's meeting.
Right away.
Roger that.
What is it?
Signal Corps.
Yes.
Yes. Repeat that?
Roger that. Thank you.
-Yes. Unneberg?
-It's not just the Germans out there.
The Brits have
four cruisers and nine destroyers
with orders to attack
the German northbound fleet.
Have we received any orders
on how to conduct ourselves?
No.
If English or German ships
enter Norwegian waters.
the government surely has to react?
Not necessarily. Nygaardsvold will do
anything to avoid being drawn into the war.
They have to assert Norwegian neutrality!
Not if that means
conflict with the English.
We have to be prepared. regardless.
Has anyone seen Sødem?
-Colonel!
-No. we haven't got hold of him.
One of our boats in the outer Oslofjord
has launched a flare.
-What colour?
-Red.
-Captain.
-Thank you.
The naval command at Horten reports
ships approaching at Rauøy.
-What kind of ships?
-It doesn't say.
-What about nationality?
-The message is unclear and lacks detail.
They could be merchant ships
going north for some reason.
-Are they past the outer defences?
-Yes.
That means they have entered
our territorial waters.
-When was the observation made?
-At 23:46. Four minutes ago.
Colonel! The Commander at Rauøy.
Put it on speaker. line two.
-This is Eriksen.
- Hello.
We've just observed an unidentified ship.
It's crossed the defence line.
Is it a warship?
The fog is so thick.
it's hard to see anything.
-But it sounded fucking massive.
-Wasn't the defence line mined?
No. we were ordered to stand by.
The fjord was clear.
But ... we did fire a warning shot.
But it didn't stop?
It just glided past in the fog like
a ghost ship. without returning fire.
They're in the Oslofjord
and could be headed towards you.
-Nationality?
-No idea.
We saw no flags or anything.
Did you see anything else?
We think there might be another ship.
We'll report any further sightings.
Unneberg get me Smith-Johannsen
or someone else at HQ.
It could be the Brits laying mines again.
Odd for a British ship
to not identify itself.
If they're headed our way.
they'll pass Horten in about an hour.
If they get past Horten. they'll pass
the observation post at Filtvet.
From there.
they'll reach us in twenty minutes.
-Will HQ issue a mobilisation order?
-We have to be prepared for that.
-And we have to prepare to lay mines.
-We don't know if it's a warship.
Colonel. Smith-Johannsen in Horten.
Line one. Colonel.
-On loudspeaker?
-Yes.
-Speaker.
-Eriksen.
Admiral Smith-Johannsen here.
What are our orders
in regards to the foreign ship?
No change in standing orders as of yet.
We're awaiting an imminent decision
from the government.
-Have you issued a mobilisation alert?
- No.
-Are we laying mines?
But this is a violation of our neutrality.
A most serious situation.
We must act with great care.
We don't want to be dragged into
the war due to rash decisions.
-So what are our orders?
- To stand by.
-Stand by?
- Yes. For now.
Do you know the nationality
or type of ship. at least?
No. There might have been a clash
between English and German ships.
and that the observed ships
were on the losing side.
and are seeking refuge
in the Oslo fjord.
Ships from nations at war must identify
themselves if they cross our defence lines.
-I'm aware of the neutrality regulations.
-Yes. yes.
The aim is to keep Norway out of the war.
Your mission is to stay alert
and keep your head cool.
-I see.
- No rash decisions.
- Nothing further to report.
-Roger that.
Are we not laying mines?
They don't see the ship as a threat?
If the warship is headed our way.
they'll be here in two hours.
From us to Oslo ...
Half an hour.
Issue the following command
to every station:
Ready for battle.
I repeat. ready for battle. Berntsen.
Bonsak? Until Sødem returns.
you're in charge oft the main battery.
Høie. Head to the orograph.
Enger. Get across the fjord.
Report when the l battery is ready.
Get the trainee officers to help.
Berntsen. Berntsen!
Send Anderssen to the torpedo battery.
Unneberg: call the police chief in Drøbak.
Drøbak must be evacuated and blacked out.
Colonel!
What about the civilians in the fortress?
We're not evacuating. Let them sleep.
Colonel!
-What will our men think ...
-I can't have civilians running around.
I can't have chaos here now.
-Report when you hear anything
-Colonel.
Alarm! Assemble by the canon post-haste!
This is not a drill!
Fall in!
Sergeant Rækken
is in charge of readying the cannon.
Sergeant Strøm. privates Jarskog.
Jacobsen. Eliasen. down in the depot.
-Off you go.
-Yes. lieutenant.
Bonsak!
-Are all trained personnel present?
-Yes.
I want cannon two manned. too.
We've barely got enough to man one.
Without two cannons.
we'll be helpless if something happens.
Divide the trained crew and
add non-combatants as needed.
-Non-combatants?
-Yes.
Orderlies. comms. cooks. anyone.
With all due respect. Colonel.
These people have hardly seen a cannon.
We have no choice.
You have to train them to be artillerists.
And you have to do it now.
-See to it.
-Colonel.
Sergeant Strøm!
-Any news?
-No.
Anderssen.
-Is the battery ready?
-Soon.
Set to vertical impact. Depth: 2.5 metres.
Distance: 425 metres.
Good.
Do we know anything more about the ships?
We've had no new information.
It's been an hour. and we've still not
received a mobilisation order.
Colonel. Captain.
-We've checked the pressure.
-Are the warheads out?
-Not yet.
-Do it.
Shall we arm them as well?
Yes.
-All of them?
-Yes.
-See to it. Bexrud.
-Roger.
Birger!
We can't fire warning shots with torpedoes.
If we attack a foreign ship with live ammo.
are we neutral. or are we the aggressor?
Captain! Torpedoes ready.
Carry out.
I just want to make sure
we're doing the right thing.
Listen. Andreas.
If a warship has come all the way here ...
Is it not they who violate our neutrality?
Is it not they who are the aggressor?
But this can't be an attack!
We've had no reports of hostile actions.
No one has fired on us.
There's no mobilisation order
or declaration of war!
We're not at war.
Norway has not been at war
for over 120 years.
No.
-Sødem!
-Colonel!
-Where have you been?
-On the mainland. like you ordered.
I've issued a "ready for battle" order.
Battle?
-There are foreign ships in the fjord.
-I'll man the main battery.
Bonsak manned it at midnight.
And I've ordered the non-combatants
to man the cannons.
-Non-combatants manning the cannons?
-Yes. So go and help Bonsak.
I'll be out soon
and take charge if anything happens.
But you're in charge of the whole fortress.
Your place is not out by the guns.
It is now.
Are there warships out on the fjord?
It's unlikely they come up here.
They have to pass the base at Horten.
They'll stop them there.
So why have you issued
a "ready to battle" order?
Because we have to ber prepared.
Alright.
I will man one of the phones
at the switchboard.
No.
What I need you to do ...
... is to go home ...
... and look after Peik. Can you do that?
Here. Let me.
Sleep fully clothed.
Go home.
Be careful.
We were ordered to stand by.
but we got no new orders after midnight.
And how did you interpret that?
That the government
wanted to remain neutral.
Yes.
Just a moment. Eriksen.
Captains Enger and Sødem.
thank you for making time for us.
Since there are
conflicting reports on this event.
we wanted to hear these
gentlemen's explanations. as well.
Let's start with the main battery.
Sødem. you were in charge there.
Colonel Eriksen just told us
he took over command.
What are your thoughts on that?
The commanding officer should not be
in such an exposed position.
It was highly irregular and strange.
He should never have been
out there with us that night.
Did the Colonel not have faith in Sødem?
He'd only been with us for a week.
He lacked. like many of his
fellow officers. practical experience.
I wanted to ensure
any shots would be well aimed.
But you agree that it is irregular?
There were many things
that had to be irregular that night.
Fire!
Get down here!
MAIN BATTERY. OSCARSBORG - 03:21
You're moving too fucking slowly.
to speak plainly.
We have to get the ammunition
from the carrier to the gun much faster.
Lower the barrel 3.5 degrees right away!
This is fucking essential!
Listen.
Half of you have never
seen a cannon fire before.
It's going to be fucking loud.
let me tell you.
If we have to fire. remain at your
designated places. Don't panic.
The pressure is immense. so before we
fire. everyone needs to be on their toes.
If the ships are hostile. we're the only
ones who can stop them!
Is that understood?
-Is that understood?
-Yes. lieutenant!
And again. One more time.
Bonsak.
-How is it going?
-It's still too slow.
We've been at it for two hours.
We haven't had any news still?
The last sighting was
three hours ago. here.
If they were headed here.
they would've passed Horten ages ago.
We would have seen them an hour ago.
And we haven't.
Colonel? Horten on line one.
Berntsen. put it on speaker.
-This is Eriksen.
- Admiral Smith-Johannsen here.
It was rather hectic
for a while there. Eriksen.
But it's calmed down.
I just spoke to Major Ferden
at outer Oslofjord fortress.
- He agrees with me.
-About what?
That the situation is not
as urgent as we thought.
The ships were probably fleeing a battle.
They were seeking refuge.
-Where are they now?
- No longer in the fjord. we assume.
It's been hours since the last sighting.
No other news to report.
Roger that.
Smith-Johannsen thinks the danger is past?
Thank you.
Let's hope he's right.
We could've ended up in a war
with a country we sympathise with.
I guess we'll never know what ship it was.
Coffee. Colonel?
Maybe it's just as well. For everyone.
Could've been anything.
English. German. French.
-Norwegian.
-Anything's possible.
Shall we dismiss the men from the guns?
Dismiss half.
We'll take turns throughout the night.
Colonel!
It's the observation post at Filtvet.
They've sighted a warship.
Nationality?
They don't know.
Sødem. assemble the men
and ready the main battery.
How did they get to Filtvet?
We'll see them any minute.
Could it be the same ship
Rauøy saw at midnight?
-Maybe it hid in the fog ...
-Commander?
New message from Filtvet.
It's not one warship.
It's five.
Three heavily armed cruisers.
They just passed them.
How the hell did five warships
get past the main base?
-Are the guns loaded with live ammo?
-No.
The ammunition used
depends on the type of vessel.
-Do we fire a warning shot?
-No. live ammunition.
345 kg brisance grenades. Get to it!
Yes. sir.
Høie. get up to the orograph.
Report as soon as you see anything.
-How are the non-combatants doing?
-I hope they've got the essentials.
If we miss. we'll blow up Drøbak harbour!
Granum!
What are our orders?
Colonel! From the torpedo battery.
Captain Anderssen
insists on a direct order.
-Are we firing?
-Tell him. yes. we are firing.
In lieu of direct orders.
we are to follow the neutrality protocol.
-That dictates we fire a warning shot.
-A warning shot has already been fired.
-From Rauøy.
-That's not valid still! Not here!
A warning shot doesn't count
for the whole fjord for all time!
Rauøy fired three hours ago.
and on one ship. not five!
That was 40 km further out!
We don't know if these are the same ships!
Once ships pass us.
they're in Oslo in half an hour.
No one else can stop them.
This is irregular. We have to confer with
the CO before we use live ammo!
You're damn right we're using live ammo!
Listen. Sødem.
I know the rules.
This is not the time for hesitation.
Is that understood?
Load up!
Gun 1 ready!
Gun 2 ready!
Do you see anything?
No.
Do you hear that?
Ready the guns.
Ready the guns!
Ready!
Colonel! I can't determine distance!
What range is the target?
I repeat. what is the distance to target?
Høie. give us the correct distance.
I can't see the distance
markers in the fog!
I can hardly see anything.
What range is the target?
-Høie!
-The target is not visible from the gun!
Distance 1800 metres.
No. that's too far.
-Distance: 1400 metres.
-Are you going by eye?
It's inside Storskjær.
The distance is 1400 metres.
Set to 1400 metres!
1400 metres!
Do you see the nationality?
No.
There are more ships behind it.
They're not in attack formation!
There are lots of people on board!
We're ready to fire!
Open fire.
Cannon one!
Fire!
Cannon two!
Down. down. down!
Cannon one!
Fire!
Ready!
-Cannon one!
-Fire!
It's just a scratch!
Get a hold of yourself!
-Bonsak! Get him to the infirmary.
-Strøm. Infirmary.
And ready the guns.
There are more ships in the fjord.
- Unneberg.
-Torpedo battery.
Yes.
- Yes. Anderssen.
-One incoming vessel.
- Repeat.
-Do you know the nationality?
- No.
You will see it soon. Ready to fire.
-Ready to fire!
-Yes. Captain!
Ready to fire!
Safety bolts out!
Vessel sighted!
Target in sight! Torpedo one!
-Ready torpedo two!
-Aye aye. Captain!
Safety bolts. out!
Target in sight!
Torpedo two!
The other ships are retreating.
We're not ready to fire.
but we're working on it.
We don't fire on fleeing ships.
We've asserted our neutrality.
The fortress has served its purpose.
Unneberg.
Has there been a declaration of war?
No.
-Has the mobilisation order been issued?
-No.
-The nationality ...?
- No.
The ship fired on the fortress.
But they also fired on Drøbak.
Several houses are alight.
Our house is on fire.
We're going to lose everything.
What about Lucie and the kids?
They ...
They got out.
I think. I hope.
Is Borghild safe?
Several houses here on the island were hit.
Borghild?
Borghild!
-Are you injured?
-No. I did as you asked.
But I heard the guns. so I had to see.
And when I opened the door ...
I tried to stop him!
But he was so quick. and now ...
I've looked everywhere.
He's probably terrified!
-You had a task.
-Yes. I ...
-You were to remain in the house!
-I'm sorry.
I have to be able to trust you.
Don't you get that?
We have to help them.
We have to help them. Father!
We can't just watch. We have to help them.
Borghild ...
They're shouting in German.
They're German soldiers.
So that's how the German
warship Blücher was sunk.
500 German soldiers lost their lives.
This delayed the
invasion of Oslo by several hours.
allowing the King and government to escape.
For this. you were awarded
the War Cross with Sword.
But there are some other matters
we'd like to discuss. Eriksen.
There were ...
... other ships.
Two shots from the main battery.
Eriksen. why ... didn't you fire more?
More?
There were more ships.
Why didn't you fire at them?
They were fleeing.
Right. This leads us to the main question
regarding the surrender of the fort.
There are conflicting accounts
in the reports we've received.
This Commission is looking into
whether the fort was surrendered too soon.
Yes. I understand that. but ...
... any new information ...
Thanks for getting in touch.
We have tried the Chief of Defence
and the Foreign Office.
No reply.
Colonel!
Oslo High Command.
Major General Hvinden Haug.
Put it through on line one.
On speaker?
-Yes.
-Speaker.
Yes?
I hear Oscarsborg has sunk
a German battleship. Well done.
What's the situation presently?
The King and government have left Oslo.
The military command too.
The Germans have attacked
multiple Norwegian positions.
Bergen. Trondheim.
Stavanger and Kristiansand.
They have all fallen.
Norway is at war.
We expect the capital to fall shortly.
German forces are on the way.
They landed at Fornebu not long ago.
-Uh ...
- Yes. Eriksen?
I don't understand.
Wasn't the runway barricaded?
No.
-Has the mobilisation order been issued?
- Yes.
When can we expect
the troops to be mobilised?
It could be several days.
Several days?
It was decided
to issue the order in the post.
In the post.
Yes. so ...
So it will likely take a while
to mobilise the troops.
So what do we do now?
What are our orders?
English ships can come
to our aid at any point.
The general's orders are to
defend the forts as long as possible.
What does that mean?
You ... have to do what you can.
I need reinforcements.
To protect the fort
from assaults from land.
That will not be possible.
Is it impossible?
Eriksen ...
Hold the fort as long as you are able.
Sødem.
Give the recruits rifles.
Have Bonsak give them a crash course.
Father? Father?
-What?
-It's Kopås.
-Yes.
- This is Enger.
We have to expect
German attacks from land.
Man all the posts.
We hear all the major cities have fallen.
What are our orders?
To hold the fort as long as possible.
We keep fighting.
Yes. Roger that.
Hansen. Holmbo.
Henriksen.
Bolt back. bolt forward.
If you need to fire. the safety is here.
Chamber. Bolt back. bolt forward.
Chamber. lever. bolt back. bolt forward.
This is the safety.
Ammunition will be
distributed at the depot.
Attention!
Listen.
We have been attacked.
Norway is at war.
But the fight is not over.
Our orders are
to hold the fort as long as possible.
We have to be prepared for
a German assault from the land.
We have to spread out. take our positions
and prepare to defend the fort ...
Faster! Come on!
Stay here!
Closer to the wall!
Everyone to the tunnel magazine. Now!
-Run!
-Come on!
Hurry!
Come on!
Women and children first!
Wait. wait. wait. Women and children first.
Further in. everyone!
-Get down! Come on.
-Further in!
There are people waiting to get in!
-Keep calm and go further in.
-Come on.
Borghild! Borghild. Come.
Further in! Spread out!
You have to spread out!
Spread out!
-Further in! Spread out!
-Further in.
Colonel!
All lines of communication are broken.
We have to get out!
Yes! We have to surrender!
We can't just sit here and wait to die!
-You can't go out.
-We have to! We're trapped!
-Be quiet.
-They could be here any minute!
You're scaring the others.
-We have to surrender!
-Get it together!
Egil? Do you have a light?
-Huh?
-Do you have a light?
-Yes?
-Yes.
Look at me.
-Does it hurt?
-Huh?
Oh. No. it's fine. I just ...
I just ...?
I don't understand what's happening.
That's alright.
No one here understands what's happening.
Reportedly. over five hundred bombs
were dropped on Oscarsborg.
Where civilians were also present.
They were trapped
in the tunnels with you. Eriksen?
-Yes.
-Eriksen.
Your daughter was also present
on the day in question?
Was she present?
Yes.
Her being there ...
Did that affect your judgment?
With regard to the decisions you made.
which led to the surrender of the fort?
No direct hits.
No.
Gather the troops.
We are to hold the
fort as long as possible.
Colonel.
-Readying the guns will take a long time.
-No.
Just get off the sand and dirt.
and they'll work.
The men are spread out over the islands.
Morale is not at a high point right now.
-Have a look at cannon one.
-Roger that.
Are you alright? Are you alright?
Where is the fire coming from?
-Where is the fire coming from?
-There are new war ships ...
Torpedo battery.
Torpedo battery!
The lines are down.
Eriksen. Are you alright?
Eriksen.
The ship firing on the fort had
positioned itself far out in the fjord
and directed all its firepower towards you.
That ship was Lützow.
one of the ships which retreated
after Blücher was sunk.
-Or got away.
-Eriksen.
Did you return fire on Lützow?
We were unable to.
Why was that?
In your opinion. what was the reason
you had to surrender the fort?
-Anderssen!
-Yes.
What's the situation here?
No wounded.
-Is the battery intact?
-Yes. yes.
-What about Kopås?
-We don't know. The lines are down.
Fetch a signal lamp.
There's a new ship in the fjord.
We have to prepare for battle.
The torpedo battery is intact.
We need the main battery operational.
Colonel.
The bombers could return at any time.
We don't know
if we can fix the main battery.
-Most of the men have been up all night.
-It's Kopås.
Good. Are they ready for battle?
Kopås signals:
one big warship at 8.000 metres.
To smaller vessels bearing north.
Kopås are ready to fire.
Jesus. You can't let them fire now.
If they concentrate their fire at Kopås.
everyone there will be blown to hell!
The island will be a pile of rubble.
You're the commanding officer.
You have to stop this madness!
Tell Kopås
to hold their fire and wait for us.
Send the following message:
"Hold your fire. Await further orders."
I repeat.
We have to get the main battery
operational. so we can fire from both sides.
Should we keep fighting?
Our orders are
to hold the fort as long as possible.
-Kopås have received the message.
-You should call a council of war.
See what the officers think.
Most of their families are here. since you
didn't want to evacuate them.
Take cover! Run!
Colonel! In here.
The bombardment is constant!
-It's over!
-The roof is about to collapse.
There's no other alternative. Birger.
Surrender!
So you messaged Kopås.
"Hold fire and await further orders"?
Yes ...
But that was the last we heard.
How did you choose to interpret that?
That the fort had surrendered.
-We hadn't.
-Alright. Eriksen.
So what. then. was the reason
you had to surrender. in your view?
What's going on up there?
Kopås and the Drøbak side have been taken.
The Germans ...
... want to negotiate a surrender.
Otherwise ...
Otherwise they will start bombing ...
Drøbak ...
... and Oslo.
What's our reply?
Send message: "We are ready to negotiate."
German forces took the Kopås battery
without firing a single shot.
But I never meant for you not to resist.
How many people died
at Oscarsborg. Eriksen?
None.
Your orders were
to hold the fort as long as possible.
You were
the commanding officer of Oscarsborg?
What was it. Eriksen?
What was the reason you had to surrender?
That Kopås was taken.
That's incorrect.
The Kopås guns could've been turned on us.
-We had no choice.
-That's not true.
The order to hold fire
was the reason we surrendered.
The reason we had to abandon Kopås.
-Eriksen had decided to give up the fort.
-That was not the meaning of the order.
When the lines are down. the battery chief
must make his own decision.
I think the Commission
has heard what it needs to today.
We will return with our final conclusion.
We would like to thank the gentlemen ...
Has the Commission
asked itself the question ...
what would have happened
if we had been prepared that night?
What do you mean. Eriksen?
If the coastal forts were fully mobilised
and armed. so no ships could have passed.
if runways had been barricaded.
preventing planes from landing ...
... the German assault would have failed
Or been prevented altogether!
I assume it is the government
which has appointed this Commission.
If you are asking who is responsible
for the surrender of Oscarsborg.
It is the 1940 government who
ought to be cross-examined here today!
They should have to answer
why the military was not prioritised.
In spite of the state of the world
and countless warnings!
I've written multiple requests
for reinforcements of Oscarsborg.
Every request was denied!
To divert attention from the failed
defensive policies and those who didn't act.
you come after the officers ...
... who actually did something.
We did our best.
It is this Commission's firm conviction that
Enger and Sødem's statements are correct.
Eriksen's command to hold fire led
to the surrender of Kopås to the enemy.
Eriksen's account
can therefore not be accurate.
The Investigative Commission of 1946
examined the battle of Oscarsborg.
Their report found not a single word
of praise for Eriksen's actions.
Eriksen's order to open fire is considered
the most important single act
in Norway during WWII.
The delay of the invasion allowed
the King and the Government to evacuate.
Birger Eriksen remained in Drøbak
with his wife and his daughter Borghild
until his death in 1958.
Subtitles: Johannes E. Refsdal
Nortext